\documentclass[12pt]{article}

\input{preamble}

\begin{document}

\maketitle

\vspace{-15mm}

\section{Project Description}

Tides play an important role in shaping exoplanet and binary star systems. The
effects of tidal coupling are evident over the entire life cycle of binary stars
and exoplanet systems, and have been suggested to play a key role in the
formation of short period giant planets, ultra short period planets, and a wide
range of satellite systems within the Solar System. In spite of the wide spread
implications, there is limited understanding of the processes involved, and the
strength of the tidal coupling they produce. The proposed investigation aims to
provide systematic, consistent, and reliable measurements of tidal coupling over
a broad range of parameters, directly usable to model the effect of tides for
almost all known exoplanet systems.

Recent Lonestar6 and stampede2 allocations have allowed us to publish five peer
reviewed publications on this topic \citep{Mahmud_et_al_23, Patel_et_al_23,
Penev_Schussler_22, Anderson_et_al_21, Penev_et_al_18}. Four of these used, and
acknowledge using TACC resources, and one performing secondary analysis without
use of TACC resources. Results were also presented at eight national and
regional conferences, including American Astronomical Society and the American
Physical Society. Two successful PhD degrees were defended based on this work.
We have also secured grant funding from NASA to support the proposed work and
its extensions over the following three years under two separate grants. The
first (80NSSC23K1486) started Sep 2023 and the second starting May 2025. The
latter supporting work to be accomplished past the period of this request (late
starting date is due to overlap in activities with 80NSSC23K1486).

Per the NASA grants, we request resources for two projects that we expect to
complete over the following year:

\textbf{Project 1:} We are currently in the final stages of development of the
software for a project that will study tides in a collection of 184 binary stars
that orbit each other close enough to raise significant tides on each other. The
friction these tides experience change the orbits of the binaries over time and
we plan to use these signatures to infer the amount of tidal friction present.
We will use Bayesian analysis (Markov chain Monte Carlo or MCMC) to constrain a
generic parametric model of tidal friction using observations of the
eccentricity of the orbits of these binary stars. This project was also proposed
last year, however before committing significant TACC resources we identified a
problem in the implemented calculations which forced us to reimplement a lot of
the code. We have since corrected the error and have thoroughly tested that
calculations are now correct and are in the early stages of the MCMC analysis
for the first batch of systems.

\textbf{Project 2:} We are also in the process of software development for a
project that aims to prepare an approximately 10 times larger, but otherwise
very similar catalog to the one used by project 1. The catalog will be based on
observations from space (from the TESS satellite) of the dimming of the stars as
they block each other's light. Thanks to the unprecedented precision of the
observations and the fact that TESS has observed the entire sky, this catalog
will provide a unique combination of very precisely determined physical
parameters for a very large collection of very bright stars.  We plan to use
this catalog to explore even more tidal physics (though not during the coming
year), but it will also provide invaluable input data for studies by many other
research groups as is evidenced by the much smaller catalog mentioned above.
This project will also rely on MCMC analysis, this time using models of the
eclipses and other effects detectable in these binary stars to compare to the
observed brightness as a function of time of each system by TESS.

\section{Resource Justification/Computational Plan}

We will use the \texttt{emcee}
package\footnote{\url{https://emcee.readthedocs.io/en/stable/}} for the MCMC
analysis. Both applications described above require only small amount of RAM and
rely on widely used and extensively tested/benchmarked open source packages
for parallelizing the computations.

We have developed and are already the code for project 1. Much of it has already
been used on TACC, including for the three most recent publications by our
group. The modifications compared to those publications do not affect the
computational requirements. The computing resources per binary star will be
almost identical to those of a recently published article, which consumed
20\,000 SUs on Lonestar6 for the analysis of 70 binaries. We already have all
the data for the proposed tidal analysis at hand -- 184 binaries -- simple
scaling shows 53\,000 SUs will be required for the successful completion of
project 1.

The requirements of project 2 are far less straightforward to estimate since so
far we only implemented parts of the calculations required. Nonetheless that is
sufficient to obtain a lower limit. The computationally expensive part of the
modeling consists of two parts: modeling the eclipses of the two stars and
modeling their out of eclipse variability. We have a model for the former, which
is the more computationally expensive of the two, and a simplified model for the
latter. A similar analysis was performed by \citet{Windemuth_et_al_19} using
data from a different satellite.  They showed $10^6$ \texttt{emcee} steps of 128
coupled MCMC chains were required for the samples to converge to a stable
posterior distribution. We carried out several two hour MCMC runs on Lonestar6,
finding that approximately 13\,000 MCMC steps per hour are produced using 8
parallel processes per binary star.  We will run 16 stars per node each using 8
parallel processes. We found that using up to 8 processes resulted in 7 times
more steps per hour than using only 1 process.  Hence, we were making efficient
use of the node. With over 1500 systems to analyze, we estimate at least 9\,000
SUs will be required for models including only eclipses. We request 12\,000 SUs
approximately accounting for the less computationally expensive but
non-negligible modeling of out-of-eclipse variability.

Thus we request a combined 65\,000 SUs to support both projects described above.

\section*{\centering{\Large References and Citations}}
\addcontentsline{toc}{section}{\protect{\numberline{\thesection}}References and
Citations}

\bibliography{bibliography}

\bibliographystyle{mnras}

\end{document}
